Adding an enhancement for checking image existence using the container-runtime. (#915)
kubernetes-sigs/kernel-module-management: docs/enhancements/0002-container-runtime.md

# Using the container-runtime to check images existance

Authors: @ybettan, @yevgeny-shnaidman

## Introduction

This enhancement aims at eliminating several pain points related to how KMM checks if container images exists.

The current implementation of KMM is checking whether images exists by generating an HTTP[s] request to the
container registry. It requires KMM to manually access a bunch of configurations files on the nodes such as:
* Container images mirroring configs
* TLS configs
* Installed CAs

In addition to that, in order to reduce the number of registy accesses, we also need to maintain a cache as
we do for the Hub&Spoke topology.

[We recently started using the cluster's container-runtime for pulling kmod images from the worker pods](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kernel-module-management/pull/886) which was a great step forward to maximum automation for pulling images
in the cluster. Once we start checking the images existance using the container-runtime as well, we will be
at ~100% automation for handlering images - everything the cluster does when pulling images, KMM will do as well.

## Goals

> 1. Reduce the number of manuall actions KMM has to take to pull images correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Remove the need for KMM to pull the images by itself using http/s and specific configuration, and instead rely on the built-in kubernetes functionality and cache
```

Author: Done.

## Non-goals

1. Add further control for building/signing kmod images.

## Design

### The new `ModuleImagesConfig` CRD

The new CRD will hold information regarding the existance of images mentioned in `Module` objects.
The cluster will contain a single `ModuleImagesConfig` per `Module` in the cluster.

```yaml
apiVersion: kmm.sigs.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ModuleImagesConfig
metadata:
  ...
spec:
  items:
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod1:kver
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod2:kver
      build:
        ....
      sign:
        ...
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod3:kver
status
  items:
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod1:kver
      status: Exists
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod2:kver
      status: DoesNotExist
```

### Module-NMC controller's changes

* The only controller creating `ModuleImagesConfig` objects - one per `Module`

> * Checking `ModuleImagesConfig`'s status to determine whether an `NMC` object should be created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Checking `ModuleImagesConfig`'s status to determine whether the defined image present/exists in the image repository or not
```

Author: Merged a slight variation of your suggestion.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    MOD((Module)) -->|Reconcile| MNMCC(Module-NMC controller)
    MNMCC --> |No MIC exists for the Module| MIC((MIC)) --> DONE
    MNMCC --> |Image's NOT in MIC's spec| A1{{Add it to ModuleImagesConfig's spec}} --> DONE(((Done)))
    MNMCC --> |Image's in MIC's spec| J1((.))
        J1 --> |Image has no status or status='DoesNotExist'| DONE
        J1 --> |Image's status='Exists'| NMC((NMC)) --> DONE
```

### ModuleImagesConfig controller (MIC) (previously called the BuildSign controller) changes

* Continue to build/sign kmods as before
* Creating pods to check if images exists and updates the `ModuleImagesConfig`'s status accordingly

**The following chart only describe the new functionality added to the controller.**
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    MIC((ModuleImagesConfig)) -->|Reconcile| MICC(MIC controller)

>         MICC --> |Image has not status| POD((Pod))

Reviewer: In case image has no status - NMC creates the pod and exits, it should not wait for pod completion. Once the pod is failed/completed, the reconcile loop will be kicked in again

Author: I will change it in the chart.

```yaml
apiVersion: kmm.sigs.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ModuleImagesConfig
metadata:
  ...
  ...
spec:
  items:
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod1:kver
      generation: 1 # default value
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod2:kver
      generation: 2
      build:
        ....
      sign:
        ...
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod3:kver
      generation: 1 # default value
status
  obserevedGeneration: 1
  items:
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod1:kver
      status: Exists
      observedGeneration: 1
    - image: registry.example.com/org/kmod2:kver
      status: DoesNotExist
      observedGeneration: 1
```

### Module-NMC controller's changes

* The only controller creating or modifying `ModuleImagesConfig` objects - one per `Module`
* Update `ModuleImagesConfig`'s spec by adding/modifying/removing entries.
* Checking `ModuleImagesConfig`'s status to determine whether the defined image exists in the image
  repository or not.
* Continues to create `NodeModulesConfig` objects as before.

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    MOD((Module)) -->|Reconcile| MNMCC(Module-NMC controller)

> MNMCC --> |No MIC exists for the Module| MIC((MIC)) --> DONE

Author: I like the simplicity of a creation (circle) of MIC as we create (circle) an NMC.

> MNMCC --> |No MIC exists for the Module| MIC((MIC)) --> DONE

Author: Fixed.

MNMCC --> |Image's in MIC's spec| J1((.))
    J1 --> |Image has no status| DONE
    J1 --> |status='DoesNotExist'| A2{{generation++}} --> DONE
    J1 --> |Image's status='Exists'| NMC((NMC)) --> DONE
```

### ModuleImagesConfig controller (MIC) (previously called the BuildSign controller) changes

* Continue to build/sign kmods as before
* Creating pods to check if images exists and updates the `ModuleImagesConfig`'s status accordingly
* Remove `ModuleImagesConfig`'s status entries that were removed from `spec`.

**The following chart only describe the new functionality added to the controller.**
```mermaid
flowchart TD
    MIC((ModuleImagesConfig)) -->|Reconcile| MICC(MIC controller)
    MICC --> |Image has no status| J1((.))
        J1 --> |Pull pod exists| J2((.))
            J2 --> |Succeed| USE{{Update status to 'Exists'}}
                USE --> GENBUMP{{observedGeneration++}}
                    GENBUMP --> DELETE{{Delete the pod}}
                        DELETE --> DONE(((Done)))
            J2 --> |Failed| USDE{{Update status to 'DoesNotExist'}}
                USDE --> GENBUMP

>         J1 --> |No pull pod| POD((Pull Pod)) --> DONE

Reviewer: Pull Pod -> Create Pull Pod

Author: I have used different forms on purpose (circles are object) so when there is a circle it means it is an object - in this case a new object.

Actions are using a different form.

Author: Fixed.
